# HealthDataAnalytics


Introduction
At the time of the writing of this paper, over 152 million cases of the virus have been reported globally- with nearly 3.2 million deaths being COVID-19 related.1 On the home front here in the United States of America, there have been nearly 32.4 million cases reported with just over 576 thousand deaths associated with COVID-19.1 Our group wanted to focus on COVID-19 effects closer to home. North Carolina has reported just over 965 thousand confirmed cases and 12.6 thousand deaths associated with COVID-19.1 We decided to explore the COVID-19 cases and deaths in North Carolina at the county level. Our focus was seeing if we could find a correlation between COVID-19 cases and deaths as it relates to geographical area, race, conditions such as diabetes prevalence and smoking status, and number of people who are fully vaccinated. We aimed to apply machine learning techniques to determine if any of the variables analyzed could be potentially used to predict who may become COVID-19 positive.
Datasets
We initially looked at numerous datasets to try to find variables that could have some connection to coronavirus cases and/or deaths at the county level in North Carolina. Ultimately, we determined that the NC Department of Health and Human Services (NCDHHS) was what we wanted to use as our main data source. The NCDHHS website provides a public Tableau dashboard with numerous tabs in which you can sort through various datasets of interest. One data set included each North Carolina county, their number of cases (count), number of cases (rate), and number of deaths per county. Another data set available in the Tableau public data was one which listed the number of people who had been fully vaccinated against Coronavirus in each NC county. Next, we selected a dataset from the NC Institute of Medicine which listed the number of interesting county metrics. There were so many data points available that we narrowed down the set to just NC county metrics on the following demographics: elderly, white, Hispanic, and African American populations, college graduation rate, adult obesity, diabetes, and smoking prevalence, as well as poverty, unemployment, and heart disease death rates. By selecting data sets which had attributes listed by county we were able to join these tables together on “county”.
Data Cleaning
There were several transformations that had to be used in order to load the data into tables in a way that each table could be merged into one large table for our final dataset. The NC Institute of Medicine county metrics data had over twenty-five different data points, thus we narrowed it down to a select number of categories and deleted rows and columns associated with the nonapplicable fields in the Excel spreadsheet. Numbers which were listed as percentages had to be converted into decimal format before loading in PostgreSQL. After loading the data into PostgreSQL, the tables were reviewed for data that needed to be cleaned. There were “null” values in some datasets which had to be converted to “0”. After loading and merging the tables together, reviewing the full merged dataset showed that there were rows that included all “null” values, which had to be removed. 
Automation and Machine Learning
During the project, each person on the team had a different set up for their database. Some created a new database, while others created a new schema within an existing database. For the purposes of automation, this posed difficult. Therefore, we did not set up our project for automation, but did however, create a file that would simulate automation based on a particular setup. This process utilized the fact that we loaded csv files into our database for cleaning. The automation process included a .bat file that initiated and the creation of a table with needed columns while setting their data types. From there, the loading of the csv file was triggered and then a query to verify. Since we did not set up our project to accommodate automation, we provided just one example of the process.
Visualization
Using Tableau, we modeled potential relationships between variables from the merged data set “analytics_project_county_covid_metrics.csv”. In the first sheet, we draw a map chart that shows the death distribution among North Carolina Counties. We used a map chart featuring number of deaths indicated by color intensity. In the second sheet, we draw a plot to draw the COVID cases and deaths distribution comparing by adding the feature to select, seeing the different rates of college graduation, heart disease, unemployment, and poverty. Also, in the next sheet, we were interested in seeing different Deaths/Cases distribution among the various populations like Hispanic, White, or African American population. In the last sheet, we have a horizontal bar for each county with a drop down to select among unemployment rate, college graduation rate, poverty rate, and heart disease death rate on the chart.
Results
We were not able to support our hypothesis that one of the demographics, socioeconomic, or chronic health indicators from our data set would have an association with COVID-19 number of cases and/or number of deaths. However, we were able to successfully create a merged dataset from multiple data files and use that data to create visualizations and insert into machine learning algorithms. 
Conclusion
Through completion of this project our team was able to increase our knowledge and skills of performing data extractions, transformations, and loads. We also applied what we were learning in class to creating models in Tableau and Python, and then worked on using machine learning algorithms on the data to try to find trends and make predictions. Even though we were not successful in identifying any new relationships we learned a lot about the challenges inherit in data analytics and what areas we can continue to study to improve our performance in health analytics applications.

Reference
1.	Johns Hopkins University & Medicine. (2021). Coronavirus Resource Center. Johns Hopkins University & Medicine- Coronavirus Resource Center. https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/data.

